---

name: Bridging two-way radios and telephones

description: >
    You are about to save a child's life and you realize that your
    phone is not with you...

title: Bridging two-way radios and telephones

img_loc: /assets/images/bridging-two-way-radios-and-telephones/page_intro.png

---

# Prelude

There has been a massive fire incident in the middle of town, and all
of your team members are occupied on other floors. Feeling exhausted
and on the verge of taking a quick break, you hear the cry of a baby
coming from behind a door. With an axe in hand, you cautiously open
the door and are horrified to witness a raging, untamed fire before
you. Your determination to save the baby overrides all else, even if
it means breaking a security policy. You have always been a
rule-abiding individual, aware of the benefits that compliance brings.
However, this situation is differentâ€”it's a matter of life and death.
You need to inform your fire chief that you're going in. Suddenly, you
realize that your phone is not with you; you only have your two-way
radios.

# Introduction


This project enables communication between two-way radios and
telephones, facilitating crucial communication for firefighters and
policemen in various scenarios such as battlefields or firefighting
situations. It allows them to connect their two-way radios to office
telephones, enabling direct communication with the headquarters.
During my time at <a
href="https://www.linkedin.com/company/fd-eshragh/" target="_blank">FD
Eshragh</a>, I developed the necessary code to implement this
functionality as part of a larger system that encompassed numerous
other features.



# Illustration of the system

The following demonstrates how officers and firefighters utilize the
system.


![](/assets/images/bridging-two-way-radios-and-telephones/bridging two-way radios and telephones.png)

The depicted scenes illustrate how operational details can be
seamlessly transferred to the headquarters, keeping them informed by
bridging telephone and radio communications.

